---
title: Warnings
subtl: As many as you can get your hands on
issue: 20
---

Some clear trends have evolved with the development of Haskell since the early
days.

  * Warnings have gradually been taken more and more seriously. To start with
    they were used relatively sparingly with individual warnings being enabled
    as needed. Gradually we have arrived at the stage where folks tend to enable
    them all, and then some, and supplement them with use tools like
    [hlint](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/hlint). It is standard practice
    to use `-Werror` to prevent any code from being checked in showing warnings.
    Critical to this is the ability turn off a warning locally if it is known
    to be harmless.

  * Constructions like default clauses in case statements that can hide warnings
    are avoided unless necessary (so analysis of enumerations tend to be spelt
    out with a case for each enumeration).

  * `newtype` wrappers are being used to distinguish integral and text types,
    and anything else that needs distinguishing.

  * Partial functions are avoided except in very limited scenarios where it is
    possibly to prove that the functions are being applied to values in their
    domain.

  * Regression testing is now taken seriously.

The last point gives a strong hint as to what has been happening. As Haskell has
been used in production settings it has acquired those norms. But with this we
have seen a natural tendency to wring as much as possible out of static
analysis.

This is a reminder that static analysis, far from being an academic
preoccupation, is now a key tool in managing code bases at scale.

I would recommend that anyone coming to Haskell cultivate the habit of enabling
as many warnings and the potential for type errors as possible. I know that when
the penny dropped with me writing code became way more satisfying &mdash; and
stable.
