---
title: Class
subtl: signature innovation is a slow burner
issue: 28
---

When Haskell initially proposed type classes as a way of systematically dealing
showing and comparing user types I was not happy and avoided using them when I
could for years. I still don't think that was a bad shout (but I boycotted them
for too long, of course).

My objections to them were as follows.

  1. Haskell was a designed by committee and that committee should have been
     steering clear of innovations that had not been already proved in working
     functional programming languages.

  2. They polluted the beautiful Hindley–Milner type system breaking a number
     of its desirable properties (equational reasoning is not nearly so clean
     with type classes).

  3. They added a stunning level of complexity to tidy up a wrinkle of having
     some magic functions to carry out the displaying and comparison of values.

  4. They introduced a program structuring mechanism that was entirely unproven
     and named to suggest a coverage of object oriented features that  was plain
     confusing.

  5. I would like these extra dictionary parameters to functions to have
     been exposed so type class resolution could be explained with source code
     transformations and so that callers could provide the modified methods to
     sort functions to control the ordering, etc. (Finally we have [a
     proposal](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/324) to
     address this and it will be interesting to see how far it gets.)

I still think that the original type classes &mdash; what you get in
Haskell 2010 without any language extension pragmas &mdash; are really too weak
and need proper multi-parameter type classes and selective liberalisation of the
original (rightly) conservative restrictions to make proper sense.

That said, what an utterly brilliant innovation type classes have been and I
think they have more to give &mdash; they are yet still being underused.
