---
title: Why Haskell Matters
subtl: It's the types stupid
issue: 4
---

If you have not read the classic 1990 John Hughes paper <a
href="https://www.cs.kent.ac.uk/people/staff/dat/miranda/whyfp90.pdf">Why
Functional Programming Matters</a> I urge you to do so. I won't try to reproduce
it here but assume you are familiar with its central thesis that pure,
non-strict  functions (of the kind that Haskell is interested in) are easier to
compose, making their functional programs more scalable than procedural
equivalents.

It all makes for a great read, but is it really true?

Everybody at the time felt it was true, and exhilaratingly so. But as the years
have gone by with the widespread adoption of higher level programming systems
like Ruby and Python I have noticed that the game has changed. These new systems
provide many of the structures that could be used to express Hughes's examples
reasonably directly. Often my Rubyist colleagues would focus on how similar Ruby
and Haskell were at their core once you got past the surface syntax, which only
made me feel that they were missing the point.


## Static Types

Programming Ruby is nothing like programming Haskell because of the static types
of course. To illustrate this I took our most senior consultant Rubyist through
a modest extension of our model's API, modifying one of the the underlying types
and listening to an audible gasp as the compiler marched me round the code base
pointing the lines to change. At the next stand-up he explained that he now
understood why we were using Haskell.

This is all old hat to contemporary Haskellers &mdash; by constructing your
codebase with modern techniques you can enlist the type checker to maintain its
coherence at scale as it evolves. Hindley-Milner type checkers came out of
theorem proving and they allow us to apply logic at acale across the code base
to adapt it to maintain its coherence.

Of all of the programming languages that are widely used at scale Haskell has
the most well-developed static type system. That is why Haskell has the greatest
potential for writing scalable code bases. That is why Haskell matters.

The thing is that this wasn't really Hughes's thesis. Does it matter?
