---
title: Managing Anxiety
subtl: In these difficult time be kind
issue: 12
---

[I said I would for time to time use this blog for non-Haskell topics and this
article is the first such article. Article edited on 2020-04-08 to add 'avoid
anger' to the recommendations.]

While listening to today's _Today In Focus_ podcast about the [UK Prime
Minister's admission to Intensive
Care](https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2020/apr/08/boris-johnsons-personal-coronavirus-battle)
I noticed I was suppressing an anxiety response. On the podcast Anushka Asthana
and Jonathan Freedland were explaining how they had experienced the news as
dramatic and shocking. This did not chime with my own experience &mdash; until I
listened to the podcast, at which point I found myself managing, briefly, a
surge of anxiety.

What is going on here? I think the way we get news and how we respond to it is
key. It is widely believed that stress weakens the immune system so it is
probably a good idea to try and free ourselves of senseless worry.

I get all of my news from [The
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/15/guardian-challenges-covering-coronavirus-live-blog-paper)
which early in the crisis put in place policies to manage the tone of reporting
and presenting news to avoid sensationalising. I have always found broadcast
news to be much more emotionally disruptive while conveying astonishingly little
content compared to newspapers and their websites. (News websites by
broadcasters like [the BBC](https://www.bbc.co.uk/) seem to be like responsible
newspaper websites.)

I find that since the early crisis that staying on top of the news by reading
the Guardian website does not contribute at all to anxiety in the way that
broadcast news does. For sure it can consume time, so discipline needs to be
maintained, but that is it. I hear people saying that they have to ration their
access to news &mdash; my suspicion is that this is predominantly broadcast A/V
news. (I would be very interested to hear from folks about their experience in
this regard.)

# Why the different response?

Specifically I think these factors may have altered my response to that reported
by Asthana and Freedland.

1. Getting informed about what is happening **helps** to reduce anxiety. Worry
festers with poor information. Good information empowers and reduces the
potential for surprises. Watching the whole evolution of the crisis, how the
virus was spreading in Londoner, how government administrators seemed to be very
poor at following their own advice, it seemed extremely likely that those at the
centre of the crisis would be vulnerable. That the Prime Minister would be
especially vulnerable seemed likely for reasons I will get to. So, like many
outside the Wesminster bubble who were paying attention, the development with
the UK PM seemed anything but surprising. While this undoubtedly creates special
problems, against the backdrop of what is projected to [break on hospitals in
the UK](https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-kingdom) and in the [developing
world](https://www.newyorker.com/news/q-and-a/how-covid-19-will-hit-india), it
did not seem like a wild development. (It should be said that while we have had
better moments, I have a lot of confidence in the UK government and civil
service to meet the challenges as the personnel rotate in and out.)

2. My response to the news of Johnson getting into trouble and being admitted to
intensive care was to put myself into his position. I have a particular problem
with our PM in that I pretty much abhor almost everything that he has done in
his professional and personal career to date and every value he has come to
represent. (Anybody familiar with politics in England for the past five years
will understand.) I **had** to be careful to avoid any trace of Schadenfreude.
It is anyway natural to imagine what has happened. The stress on any Prime
Minister is pretty severe at the best of times never mind the worst of times. It
is fair to say that Johnson's current role is not very natural despite his
(quite natural) belief that it was his destiny. Clearly he should have addressed
the succession issue and convalesced properly &mdash; something that would
hitherto come very naturally and be his natural state. That this did not happen
is easy to understand. On a human level it was easy to feel a strong empathy
and to pull for his quick recovery.

3. I have a longstanding daily meditation practice that helps to stabilise my
moods, with sleep, axiety, etc.

## Recommendations

1. Try to avoid sources of anxiety &mdash; it is contagious.

2. Try to stay informed with high quality sources and cut out broadcast news.

3. Develop a focus on the _global picture_ as, done right, it helps to keep your
own worries in perspective.

4. Develop empathy for those in unfortunate circumstances, under high economic,
health or work stresses. [Compassion is a really powerful
tool](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hBjDO6ZaSPM) in dealing with stress,
considered by some as the ultimate antidote.

5. Develop gratitude for those that are risking their lives to keep us all fed
and healthy. Such appreciation is a really good development of this crisis and,
where true, cannot be commended enough.

6. Avoid anger, including towards those not adhering to the lockdown in ways
that you think they should. It simply cuts against points 1 and 7.

7. If you can try to develop a [meditation
practice](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XHvtIcaD194). (Sorry, you will have to
seek out a source of instruction that suits you.)
