---
title: PVP
subtl: Time to move on
issue: 34
---

I really don't like typing upper bounds into my Cabal files.

  * For me they are just horribly slowing, tiresome, fiddly and error prone.
  * I have always felt that it does not scale well to require all developers
    to add them to all package dependencies it for relatively _abstract_
    gains. Of course this becomes sharper with the popularity of stack and
    Stackage which derive no gains from upper bounds.
  * Prolific package authors have
    [argued against them](https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/haskell-cafe/2012-August/102885.html).
    (This originally alerted me to the issue.)

This is just my opinion, shared and opposed as it is.

As we know the [PVP](https://pvp.haskell.org/) requires users to supply upper
bounds in all package dependencies in cabal files and we have been living with
divided opinions on this for about a decade, and it is not helpful.

I think we can do this while keeping (almost) everyone happy.

  * Get everyone to agree to strict adherence to the PVP and after a grace
    period adjust the various tools to enforce it.

  * Provide tools to fill in upper bounds according to the state of Hackage
    (more about this below).

_Voila_. The upper bounds are in the cabal files and the folks that don't want
to type them have the option of not typing them.

None of this is new of course. The reason it might work now is that we are
starting to talk to each and that could &mdash; no, _should_ &mdash; make the
difference.

## How?

The only way tools are going to fill in missing values is by following
conventions. The convention that I want is that if an upper bound is missing
from a cabal file I want my tool to find the current latest version of the
package on Hackage and upper-bound to all packages that are PVP-compatible
with that latest package. If folks want other conventions then we can provide
for those also (but that seems to be the obvious convention to me).

## No, really, how?

For this to work we need a way of injecting this filling in process into the
workflow of Stack/Stackage developers especially. Many of us use
[_hpack_](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/hpack) which could be adjusted to
fill in the upper bounds while generating the cabal files from the
`package.yaml` files.

Time to move on.
