---
title: Getting your Version
subtl: The Paths_foo has your version, but beware
issue: 13
---

This just a brief note to self, and y'all, on how an app can discover its own
version.

Often it is useful to be able to expose your version, possibly in response to
`--version` request from the command line. Clearly it is desirable that this
should not rely on manual intervention, leaving two options:

  * the Haskell build system makes it available somehow or

  * the versions get burned into the source as part of the project's release
    mechanism.

For smaller projects the first variant is particularly welcome as they are
unlikely to have the kind of release mechanism that can ensure the version is
reliable made available to the running program.

## Yay, the Toolchain has your back, mostly

If your app is called `foo` then it will be found in the `Paths_foo` module
automagically maintained by the build system. (The `Paths_foo` module is
documented in the [Cabal section of past GHC doc
sets](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/7.0.3/docs/html/Cabal/authors.html#paths-module).)

If you need to use the version in an executable then it will have to list `foo`
in its Cabal dependencies.

## The recipe I use

### 1. Add `Paths_foo` to the library's exposed modules

```haskell
library
  exposed-modules:
      Paths_foo
```

### 2. Import `Paths_foo` and `Data.Version`

Import `version` from `Paths_foo` and `Version` from
[`Data.Version`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.12.0.0/docs/Data-Version.html)
into any module in the library needing access to the version. Your package's
`version` will be of type
[`Version`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.12.0.0/docs/Data-Version.html#t:Version).

```haskell
import Data.Version(Version)
import Paths_foo(version)

vrn :: Version
vrn = version
```

## Why?

You can just list `Paths_foo` in the `other-modules:` of your executable but
then [`ghci` will not be able to follow
along](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/21588500/haskell-cabal-package-cant-find-paths-module).

## Using `hpack`?

If you don't need `ghci` to see the `Paths_foo` then your generated cabal file
should always have `Paths_foo` listed in `other-modules` and you just can import
it. If you need ghci to see it will have to be listed in the library's
`exposed-modules`.
